Organizations have tension between allowing each team to choose technologies and solutions that are appropriate to their needs, versus keeping the amount of variation in the organization to a manageable level.
The automation fear spiral describes how many teams fall into configuration drift and technical debt. At an Open Space session on configuration automation at a DevOpsDays conference, I asked the group how many of them were using automation tools like Ansible, Chef, or Puppet. The majority of hands went up. I asked how many were running these tools unattended, on an automatic schedule. Most of the hands went down. Many people have the same problem I had in my early days of using automation tools. I used automation selectively — for example, to help build new servers, or to make a specific configuration change. I tweaked the configuration each time I ran it to suit the particular task I was doing. I was afraid to turn my back on my automation tools because I lacked confidence in what they would do. I lacked confidence in my automation because my servers were not consistent. My servers were not consistent because I wasn’t running automation frequently and consistently. This is the automation fear spiral, as shown in Figure 2-2. Infrastructure teams must break this spiral to use automation successfully. The most effective way to break the spiral is to face your fears. Start with one set of servers. Make sure you can apply, and then reapply, your infrastructure code to these servers. Then schedule an hourly process that continuously applies the code to those servers. Then pick another set of servers and repeat the process. Do this until every server is continuously updated. Good monitoring and automated testing builds the confidence to continuously synchronize your code. This exposes configuration drift as it happens, so you can fix it immediately.
