Who Writes Infrastructure Code? Here are a few different ways organizations answer the question of who writes and edits infrastructure code: Builders write code Some organizations try to keep traditional processes and team structures. So the team that builds (and perhaps supports) infrastructure uses Infrastructure as Code tools to optimize its work. Users request an environment, and the build team uses its tools and scripts to build it for them. See “Using Value Stream Mapping to Improve Workflows” for an example of how optimizing a build team’s process tends not to improve the end-to-end process, either for speed or quality. Users write code Many organizations enable application teams to define the infrastructure that their applications use. This aligns user needs to the solution. However, it either requires every team to include people with strong infrastructure expertise or tooling that simplifies defining infrastructure. The challenge with tooling is ensuring that it meets the needs of application teams, rather than constraining them. Toolmakers write code Specialist teams can create platforms, libraries, and tools that enable users to define the infrastructure they need. In these cases, the users tend to write more configuration than code. The difference between toolmakers and builders writing code is self-service. A builder team writes and uses code in response to requests from users to create or change an environment. A toolmaker team writes code that users can use to create or change their own environments. See “Building an Abstraction Layer” as an example of what toolmakers might build. Governance and testers write code
People who set policies and standards, and those who need to assure changes, can create tools that help other people to verify their own code. These people may become toolmakers or work closely with toolmakers. Using Value Stream Mapping to Improve Workflows Value stream mapping is a useful way to break down your lead time, so you can understand where the time goes.4 By measuring the time spent on various activities, including waiting, you can focus your improvements on areas that make the most difference. Too often, we optimize parts of our process that seem the most obviously inefficient but which have little impact on the total lead time. For example, I’ve seen teams implement automation to cut the time it takes to provision a server from eight hours to ten minutes. This is a massive 98% decrease in the time to provision a server. However, if users typically wait ten days to get their new server, the total decrease is a much less exciting 10% decrease. If server request tickets wait in a queue for an average of eight days, you should focus your efforts there instead. Value stream mapping makes the time to complete an action visible so that you can find the best opportunities for improvement. Continue to measure the end-to-end lead time, and other metrics such as failure rates, while you make improvements. Doing this helps avoid optimizations to one part of your process that make the full flow worse.

